Pest management is a critical component of conservation planning. It should be used in conjunction with crop residue management, nutrient management, conservation buffers, and other practices to address natural resource concerns and to maximize economic
returns by enhancing the quantity and quality of agricultural commodities. Pesticides used in pest management can negatively impact nontarget plants, animals,
and humans. Unintentional exposure may occur in transport and handling, in the field, and after transport from the field in soil, water, and air. Ground and surface water quality impairment resulting from nonpoint source pesticide contamination is a major
concern in many agricultural areas. Other forms of pest management also have environmental risks. Cultivation for weed control, burying or burning crop residue for disease and insect control, and biological methods of weed, insect, and disease control can negatively impact soil, water, air, plants, animals, and humans. To adequately address these environmental
risks, conservation planning must include a pest management component that minimizes negative
impacts to all identified resource concerns.

Many pest management principles are detailed and complex. Formal academic training is often required to master these principles. The Natural Resources Conservation Service's (NRCS) National Employee Development Center (NEDC) is developing a course to help conservationists gain the technical background they need to develop conservation plans with an
effective pest management component. The name of the course is Nutrient and Pest Management Considerations in a Conservation Management System Plan. This self-paced study course will take about 60 hours to complete. A prerequisite course entitled Introduction to Water Quality is currently available from the NEDC.

Conservation planning involves more than just considering individual resources. It focuses on the natural systems and ecological processes that sustain the resources. The planner must strive to balance natural resource issues with economic and social needs through the development of a Resource Management System (RMS). A CMS combines management and
conservation practices that, when installed, will achieve a specified level of treatment for all resources (soil, water, air, plants, animals, and humans). Progressive planning at incrementally higher levels of treatment eventually results in an RMS that prevents degradation and permits sustained use of all natural resources.